Welcome Dr. Thomas Seaff Freed. It's a
pleasure to have you on the show today.
>> Thank you very much Dr. Deming. It's a
real pleasure to be here to have this
opportunity to speak with you.
>> Thank you. Well, you know, I wanted to
start just by asking you how did you
initially become interested in cancer as
a metabolic disease?
>> Well, you know, that's a 20 to 30 year
story. It doesn't, you know, a lot of
people ask me this and you'll hear me
giving this description of how we all
got into this because we, as I said to
people, we don't start our research
scientific career thinking we're going
to manage this cancer problem using
metabolic approaches. You know, we were
all predominantly indoctrinated into the
idea that cancer was a genetic disease.
And we all studied anko genes and tumor
suppressor genes and targeted therapies.
And we just heard a lot about all the
mutations. And you just talk about ankco
genes and tumor suppressive genes as if
you actually knew what was going on. And
in in reality, we no one had any idea
what was going on. All we knew there was
a lot of mutations. And we just told my
students, "Oh yeah, cancer is a genetic
disease. You know, you have these
different p-53 mutations, does this,
does that." And we didn't think about it
because it was in the book, and this is
what you teach the students out of the
book. But don't forget, we were deeply
involved in research in ganglioide
biochemistry, which is lipids that
accumulate in the brain of patients with
t-ax disease and these kinds of uh rare
lipid storage diseases. But we were I
was trained in fundamental neurobiology,
biochemistry and genetics at the
University of Illinois State University.
Moved my program to Yale University
where I was in the neur neurology
department. We were working on brain
biochemistry and at that time Yale was
one of the leading programs in epilepsy
in the country. So Dr. Gil Glasser was
there and a variety of other
distinguished uh physician scientists.
So I knew as a PhD in a clinical
department of neurology I would need to
do something that was related to the
mainstream of that department if I
wanted to stay in the department and it
was epilepsy. So we started looking at
mapping epilepsy genes and I actually
wrote a paper or an internal grant at
that time to the medical school at Yale
University indicating you know ketogenic
diets for epilepsy are interesting and
we had all these animal models of
epilepsy and I I prop I wrote a nice
little proposal up to see if we could
treat mice with ketogenic and they threw
it back at me so nobody's interested in
that. This is like P. This was stuff
from the 1920s. today we have all this
uh new drugs and all these guys. I as a
young scientist I didn't know what to
say. I said okay well we just continued
on mapping genes for epilepsy. But then
I was involved and I came up to Boston
College after I was an assistant
professor at Yale. I came up here as
associate professor and we were still
working on epilepsy and I got some
really good epilepsy models and mapping
the genes and we were looking at all
these different kinds of things. At the
same time I was doing a lot of
biochemistry and glyco like glycobiology
and one of my students Dr. Mariana TR uh
went to the one of the epilepsy meetings
and I went to the epilepsy meetings to
talk about the genetics of epilepsy. She
came back and said oh this guy Jim
Abrams from California the movie maker
his he makes the movie the airplane
movies and these kinds of things and she
said he's excited about ketogenic diets
for epilepsy. So so I told to Marian
forget it nobody's interested in that.
That's what the guys at Yale told me.
And it they were the leaders in
epilepsy. So she's, "Oh no, this guy Jim
Abrams," because his son Charlie, they
started the Charlie Foundation, he got
Meryill Streep to do the her first do no
do no harm. So her influence, of course,
being a superstar kind of brought the
attention. And Jim, his son Charlie was
on a near death being treated by
conventional medications, standards of
care, and he just, his seizures were
just unrelentless. They were relentless
in uncontrolled and couldn't be managed.
Finally, he found former colleagues at
Johns Hopkins, John Freeman and Eric
Sooff and Kosoff and others. And it
turned out that Charlie was put on this
diet and his seizures became managed and
that was the movie Do No Harm and all
this kind of stuff. But then I became
very excited about this. I said, "Wow,
let's look into this a little bit more
deeply." So I was involved in setting up
some of the early workshops on ketogenic
diets for epilepsy and then we brought
in more and more people in it. The first
it was only like a small group maybe
five or eight 10 physician scientists
that were interested in this and then by
the time I I stopped doing this I mean
there were halls of people filled with
wanted to know more about this. So yeah
so we started and then you know I was
working on cancer at the same time but
it was brain cancer and it wasn't
anything to do with management. And it
was all biochemistry, brute force
biochemistry, just to look at
differences between human human brain
tumor biochemistry and mouse brain tumor
biochemistry with the hope of finding
some sort of parallelism. But then,
interestingly enough, as I tell others,
we were working with these glycobiology
synthesis, ganglioy synthesis inhibitors
with the hope that we could reduce the
storage of material in the brains of
kids with t-axs disease. So because if
we could stop the accumulation of the
ganglioside the accumulating glyolippid
we might be able to help manage the
disease called substrate reduction
therapy. So they they gave me a drug and
then you know one thing leads to another
we put the drug on some mice that had
brain tumors. So lo and behold the drug
that was going to work to stop
ganglioide biosynthesis had a huge
effect on shrinking brain tumor in these
mice. So I called the company I called
the company that was making this drug.
They got super excited. They said, "Oh
my god, we may found this drug that can
stop brain cancer." And it's very, very
simple drug. And so they gave me
$200,000.
This was 20 some odd years ago to figure
out how this drug was blocking brain
cancer. And because they were all
excited that it was going to inhibit the
ganglioide pathway, thereby ganglioides
could be inhibited, play a big role in
managing cancer. So we did all these
studies and we noticed that the drug
shrunk the tumors big time and stopped
ganglioide biosynthesis but at the same
time it was making the mice body weight
was reduced. So that was interesting. So
we we had this speculation do you think
it the reduction in the tumor side had
tumors had anything to do with the body
weight loss rather than the restriction
of the ganglioide biosynthesis. So we
repeated the experiments and this time
we put in mice that got no drug in their
food but we restricted the food so the
body weight of the control group matched
the body weight of the drug treated
group. And uh we found strikingly that
the tumor shrunk to the same exact size
as the guys getting the drug. And then
we realized that the drug the mice were
always eating but they lost weight. And
we couldn't figure this out because how
is it possible the guys could eat the
food and not and lose weight? The other
guys were the control guys were deprived
of the food. So their body weight was
matched but these other guys are still
eating. So it turned out interestingly
enough that the drug block sucraes in
the gut. So the animals were eating the
food but they couldn't digest it.
>> Wow.
>> So that accounted for why they shrunk.
But then when we looked at the
biochemistry of the tumors in the brain,
yes, the drug guys had restricted
ganglioide biosynthesis, but it wasn't
that. It was the anti-angioenic effect
of the calorie restriction that was
causing the shrinkage of the of the
tumor. And of course the drug company
was very unhappy uh by the fact that
their specta their super what the
blockbuster drug would just deprive mice
of eating and the the fact that they
weren't eat they weren't able to digest
their food uh shrunk the tumors down. So
this was not the kind of blockbuster you
want to really talk about. So of course
the funding was pulled the plug on the
funding was pulled immediately and and
we did publish this. thought why we're
going to publish it. It definitely
reduces ganglia shrinks the tumor but we
don't we don't want you to say that it
was through body weight. I said what do
you mean the hell that's the reason
that's what it worked by don't give me
any stuff. So anyway we published the
British Journal of Cancer and that was
the end of my affiliation with the
government. But anyway that's the way
science works. But it brought us to the
idea what was what was going on with
this calorie restriction. Why are the
tumors shrunk so much? And um we started
to look and and I knew from the work of
epilepsy we knew and and this is another
thing we knew these ketogenic diets
worked but they worked by lowering blood
sugar and you can get the same effect of
a ketogenic diet as you can with water
only fasting. So the epilepsy and the
cancer were both going down as the
result of managing lower blood sugars.
And we showed that we showed clearly
that the level of sugar was responsible
for both the m maintenance of of of
epilepsy seizure inhibition as well as
shrinking tumors. And then we also knew
that ketone bodies were going up when
you fast water only fasting and this
kind of thing. Uh ketones go up and
that's the reason Wilder made the
ketogenic diet in the first place back
in 1921. at Mayo Clinic mainly because
he knew that water only fasting blocked
epileptic seizures but it wasn't a
long-term therapy. You had to have
something. So he looked at water only
fasting saw blood sugar go down, ketones
go up. He said let's build a diet that
could do something like that so the
patients don't have to start to death
while we're managing their seizures. So
um that's how the ketogenic diet got
started. If you want to learn how to
implement the ketogenic diet and the
press pulse protocol into your cancer
management, just visit school.com/keto
for cancer, the new community by our
research analyst Johnny Rocker. Within
this new community platform, you can
connect with other patients and learn
from their experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results. These sections cover all parts
of the press pulse protocol that you
should implement. Starting with the
general scientific concepts by Dr.
Thomas Cipher, we will show you how to
start the ketogenic diet, including
which foods to choose and which to
avoid. Additionally, we prepared a list
of doctors specialized in metabolic
therapy as well as details about
glutamine inhibition and hyperbaric
oxygen protocols.
So, take a look around at school.com/
keto for cancer.
Uh, but for the brain cancer, we we used
a ketogenic diet unrestricted did not
shrink the tumors. It was only when you
calorie restricted it. That's why you
could either you could either do it on a
regular high carb diet or a ketogenic
diet as long as the blood sugars went
down and the ketones went up. So it was
that kind of a of of a relationship. And
then we said um had anyone ever noticed
this before um other than anecdotal
observations and it all went back to the
great scientist Dr. Otto Warberg who
clearly said cancers are driven by
sugar. They're driven by sugar because
the mitochondria are dysfunctional. So
the cell the all tumors have
dysfunctional oxidative phosphorilation
or mitochondria ability to get energy
from oxygen. So he said they have and in
order for them to survive they have to
ferment and they use glucose as a
fermentable fuel which is energy without
oxygen. So he was saying that the cancer
cells are all fermenttors because they
their oxidative phosphorilation their
mitochondria are defective. The
reorganel that's needed to get energy
from oxygen is dysfunctional and
therefore the cells have to suck down a
lot more glucose uh to survive. And it
was a shift from Oxfos to fermentation.
So uh we we con we confirmed that I
wrote a big book on this whole thing
doing a deep dive on what Warberg said
and why they attacked him and what was
all the the fighting about and why
people didn't understand that. So over
the years uh we clearly showed that Otto
Warberg was absolutely correct on
defining the origin of cancer as a
mitochondrial metabolic disease. Uh he
was correct that all cancers need to
ferment. He was incorrect in using the
quantitative readouts uh of oxygen
consumption and lactic acid production
to quantify how much energy was coming
into these cancer cells. We have
resolved all this now and he did not
know about the second form of
fermentable fuel uh which was glutamine
and that's our big thing. Um every I
shouldn't say when I say big thing if
you ask anybody in the cancer field
they'll they'll all go yeah we know
glutamine. Glutamine is a powerful fuel
for cancer, but they all think it's
respired. We're saying it's fermented.
So, there's a big difference here. It's
how you use the fuel. Okay? How is the
cell using the fuel? Our immune cells,
normal immune cells, uh, use glutamine
and they respire it. It's it's an
anoplurotic. That means the carbons of
glutamine are going into the TCA cycle.
Anoplurosis. But when cancer cells take
in glutamine, they are not doing the
anoplurosis. They're doing the
fermentation and they're throwing out a
waste product called suinic acid. So
there's a big difference and this is the
the battle lines right now in the cancer
metabolism field. Scientist to scientist
lab group to lab group. Uh the battle is
that is that cancer cells are fermenting
an amino acid called glutamine. They're
not respiring it. Normal cells can
respire but not the cancer cell. They
ferment. Normal cells can respire
glucose. cancer cells fermented. So, so
that Warberg was right. And then I went
through the entire uh ancient literature
on electron microscopy, ultra structure.
I had to go through and look at all
these guys that did major hospitals
looking at uh mitochondria under the
electron microscope of all these cancer
cells. And in every one I saw damaged
Chris Day, broken mitochondria, few
mitochondria, all the things that
Warberg actually said. But uh at his
time, they didn't have the electron
micro. didn't actually see the
structural abnormalities that we now can
see very very clearly. So it explains
the linkage for why cancer cells are
fermenttors because the structure needed
for them to generate energy through
oxidative phosphorilation is defective.
Um, now that's a still a major
controversy in my area because they're
using all these sophisticated new
respiration instruments like a seahorse
and they say, "Oh, the cancer cells are
sucking down oxygen real good and
they're making ATP through
mitochondria." And I'm going a little
deep here on it, but you know, some
people always ask me, can you can you
get to the guts of this problem? And the
problem is is that cancer cells take in
oxygen, but they're not using it
efficiently for for making energy. So
they're using it for other things like
making reactive oxygen species ROS which
are carcinogenic and mutagenic. So
that's when we found out that all these
mutations that the cancer field is
studying are all downstream
epiphenomenon of damage to the oxidative
phosphorilation. So we have spent
hundreds of billions of dollars on the
genome projects and all these precision
medicines and all this kind of stuff
looking for things that are downstream
effects. They're not the cause, they're
the effects. So this then brings
everything back into perspective. So
when the National Cancer Institute says
cancer is a genetic disease, they're
wrong. They're not correct. They don't
look at the data. It's but it's become
such a dogmatic view that all this the
grants, the NIH grants, the hospitals,
the the pharmaceutical industry, they're
all in building imunotherapies and all
these targeted therapies, precision
medicine, it's all based on a flawed
theory. It's not a genetic disease. It's
a metabolic disease. And once you
realize that the entire paradigm of how
you manage cancer will change. I could
go on for but you asked me to give you
an overview and I'm sorry I have to go a
little bit deeper. And I have found over
these years most of the folks in our
country are scientifically illiterate
and and the people treating the disease
cancer almost clueless as to the biology
and biochemistry that underlies the
disregulated cell growth and the
patients who come into these guys also
have no clue. So you have the blind
leading the blind and as the result of
this you have uh almost 1,700 people a
day dying from cancer in the United
States and when I start my cancer class
every Tuesday and Thursday we have to
recognize in the one hour of my class
we'll have 70 dead people from cancer in
the United States in one hour you'll
have 70 dead people and this is going on
every day in and day out week after week
after month after year it's not changing
It's only getting worse. So, it's never
going to change big time until you
recognize that this is a metabolic
disorder and not a genetic disorder. The
problem is it's too radical. It's too
disruptive to an entire system in an
industry. So, uh people are they just
can't discuss it and they deny it. Well,
there's no clinical trials. Oh, I
haven't heard about that. I I would have
had it medical school. I would have
develop There's always some
non-scientific excuse. It's happening
and and it works and it will work even
better once the physicians understand
what to do and how to do it. I couldn't
agree with you more on so many of your
points but as being you know trained
western trained medical doctor and then
radiation oncologist and actually you
know in my specialty we have to take 2
years of advanced cancer biology and
radiation physics everything that we're
taught is about the DNA that the DNA is
the cause and that this is what's
ingrained into us even though you know
my specialty was breast cancer and
gynecic cancers and in breast cancer
specifically, I know that only 5 to 10%
of it is genetically related. The rest
is spontaneous and we say we have no
idea. And so it's interesting that we're
trained into this paradigm to think that
it's the cause, but then in practice
it's clearly a minority where they have
a genetic mutation. Well, even the
genetic mation like bracka 1 or p-53 for
the leaf ramen many or some of the other
mutations I have tracked them all down
and none of them are 100% penetrate
meaning that they're secondary risk
factors because as women with bracka one
mutations don't get breast cancer but
those who do get breast cancer it
damages oxidative phosphorilation so the
mutation is a secondary risk factor some
woman could have breast cancer because
of intermittent hypoxia systemic
inflammation uh from radi ation from a
viral infection. There's a lot of ways
that you can get the same thing that
that looks like the same under the
microscope that have multiple different
causes, but every one of those cells in
that breast cancer are fermenttors.
Regardless of what their genetic
mutations look like, they're all
fermenting. Every cell in the tumor
that's neoplastic and disregulated in
its cell growth is fermenting. There's
only two fuels that drive fermentation,
and that's glucose and glutamine. And
they can't burn fatty acids or ketone
bodies. So now you have a clear plan to
manage them. And I can't tell you how
many women with stage four breast cancer
or these terminal like you would use not
these kinds of terminologies but can be
managed and they have a high quality of
life and I don't know how long they're
going to survive but they certainly feel
better. when they were at 35 with a with
a advanced stage breast cancer and they
die from old age, then you know that
person was obviously but but you you
wouldn't be able to say that uh until
until you know that they went that long
because you never can really know if
you've it could come back 10 20 years
later. But the issue is is that you have
a level of control. You can control your
destiny to a to a large extent if you
know that the cells in your tumor
wherever it's a co a colon ovarian
breast brain doesn't make a difference
they're all very they all ferment so but
you have this extra control mechanism we
we have uh Pablo Kelly I've been working
with him now for uh nine years a
glyobblasto guy from from England he has
a little website he can tell you all
about his he just finished his third
debulking surgery he never took
radiation chemo or anything he just used
metabolic therapy Is he cured? No. Is he
alive and doing well? Yes. He's had a
family and all this since he's had his
tumor. But he rejected all the standard
of care because he knew it was going to
damage him. And we know in glyopblasto I
published papers a majority of people
who die from glyopblasto dying from the
treatment. Um they're dying from the
radiation. It frees up massive amounts
of glucose and glutamine in the micro
environment of the tumor leading to
recurrence and death. And we think that
if we avoid radiation to the brain, we
think we can keep these people. I'm not
saying we cure them, but they certainly
can live a hell of a lot longer at a
higher quality of life. And I don't
think there's anything wrong with that.
You know, if you're doubling their
lifespan and they have a good quality of
life, I think that's a major advance.
And some of these guys, like Pablo, he's
still alive. So, how many more can we
have like that? So, I I am very hopeful
for the future. I I just don't know how
long it's going to take for the system
to understand this and change.
>> Well, I mean, I think the incentives are
against having a systemic change to
adopt this because it's, you know, free
to do a diet rather than doing some
drug. And so, I think the incentives in
terms of and also within the research
and everything like you said, you know,
the grants were pulled when basically
showed it wasn't the diet, it wasn't the
drug, it was, you know, the restriction
of the calories. One question that I
have for you is basically you're saying
that cancer is a dysfunction of the
mitochondria and that this is what is
leading to fermentation within the
cells. The cells are using glucose and
we can use the ketogenic diet as a
therapeutic means to basically starve
the cancer cells. But one of the
questions that I have for you is like
thinking you know I have a lot of
listeners who don't have cancer yet. the
statistics are not good in terms of
where we're headed as a society with 50%
of the population projected to develop
cancer in their lifetime by 2030. What
are the things that people are doing
that they can help with their
mitochondrial function even before they
get cancer? And then also once someone
has cancer in addition to doing the
ketogenic diet, what are other
mitigating factors there that are
affecting the mitochondria?
>> Yeah. Well, that's a excellent excellent
question. I know a lot of people have
that have that same question. As I wrote
in my book, it's very difficult to get
cancer if your mitochondria remain
healthy. And how do you then maintain
healthy mitochondria? A and that is you
have to do exercise and you have to make
sure that your obesity is now replacing
smoking as one of the most prominent
risk factors for cancer. And I think I
mean let's be honest lack of exercise,
obesity, systemic inflammation, all
these kinds of stress, emotional stress
uh is another provocative agent. Um all
of these in one way or another will
cause chronic damage to the mitochondria
leading to compensatory fermentation and
the risk of disregulated cell growth in
some population of cells in some part of
the body. So I said I did started
working with ketogenic diets for
epilepsy which is kind of a more
traditional thing now rather than some
alternative type of approach but we
learned the ratio of glucose to ketones
in the blood and we developed a meter
the calculator is called the glucose
ketone index and you'll hear a lot of
cancer patients or oh I don't want to do
a keto oh it's horrible I get diarrhea
constipation or whatever that whatever
they have but but we found out that you
can take any diet as long as you can get
your GKI down to a ratio of 2.0 or
below. It's you're going to make your
mitochondria very very healthy because
they're going to be burning ketone
bodies. And ketone bodies protect the
metabolic efficiency of the
mitochondria, prevent reactive oxygen
species, maintains your mitochondria in
a healthy state. So people say, well,
how do I do that? What can I eat? And
the answer is water only fasting will do
it. But oh, I don't want to. Is there
anything else you can give me? I don't
want to do that, you know. Of course,
nobody wants. It's hard. You tried let
people do it. I tried it. Brutal. The
the issue is is we do low carb for a
week or 10 days. Um because that allows
the body to slowly transition away from
the availability of dietary introduced
carbohydrates and then we jump into
water fasting. for cancer patients. This
is the jump now becomes so much less
stressful to the body because their body
has already semiaac acclimated to this
new metabolic state uh this new
homeostatic state. So ketones are
naturally starting to elevate. Your body
is now going after your fat and the fat
in your cells, your atyposytes are
mobilized and put into the bloodstream
and it goes to the liver and the liver
it's like those fats are like putting
branches in a wood chipper. Out come the
water soluble ketone bodies which then
subserve the energy of almost all cells
in in our body. Okay. So the liver makes
this uh bouquet of energy for the heart,
brain, and all these other cells uh that
that can use an alternative to glucose.
So then when you jump into water only
fasting, it's not so traumatic. It's
yeah, it still is to some extent, but
not as bad as if you go cold turkey. And
the exercise is absolutely important for
managing your health. We are sitting in
traffic on cell phones in traffic
listening to books on tape in traffic.
But sitting in traffic is stressful and
doesn't do anything for your
cardiovascular system. Our western diet
and lifestyle puts us at risk for all
the chronic diseases that are presently
crippling the health of our nation. So I
al I sometimes look at it as a national
security risk. uh we're putting so many
people at risk. And don't forget, we
evolved during the Paleolithic period.
Uh there weren't Dunkin' Donuts and
delicates on every corner during a
Paleolithic period. We were always in a
level of semi ketosis because it was
hard to get food. We're we we had to use
a lot of energy to kill and eat
something or catch something. That was
before the agricultural revolution in
the Neolithic period. So most of it we
we evolved as hunter gatherers. Only did
we in the near 10,000 some odd years ago
did we start planting corn and rice and
wheat and this kind of thing where we
can build civilizations around the food.
So we didn't have to spend all our time
chasing down buffaloos and whatever else
we ate. But but that was our historical
history. We we we have an incredible
capability of storing energy because we
evolved in an energy depleted
environment. Now the obesity epidemic is
evolution in action. People want to know
what evolutionary biology is. It's the
obesity epidemic because now we have all
this energy that we never had access to.
And we store it. We store it because
we're going to be starving to death if
we don't. So the obesity epidemic is
evolution in action. But now it's
putting us at risk for cancer, type 2
diabetes, dementia, macular
degeneration, cardiovascular disease.
You name it. Go right down the list.
It's all diet lifestyle. And that's kind
of a cliche. Diet lifestyle. Diet
lifestyle. Okay. If you're walking 3 to
four miles a day every single day and
you're not eating a lot of
carbohydrates, you're putting yourself
at a better place to be resistant to
some of these things, including cancer.
We are in charge of our own destiny. But
we are tempted. We have temptations all
over the place. Just walk out to any
downtown section. Oh, the aroma of the
baked goods, the aroma of the of the
barbecue grills. I mean, it's just like,
wow, this is unbelievable. So um I'm not
saying we should not do any of this but
you know to do it every day and highly
processed carbohydrate foods. This is
like semi poison to us and and it it
stores wasted energy poorly nutritious
food but yet the calories the the
glucose is stored in fat. So the glucose
from what we eat is stored as fat. And
people always say how is it possible you
would a fat diet like a ketogen lose
weight because you can e you can't store
fat. Well you either burn it or excrete
it. you don't store it very well, but
glucose is stored. Glucose is gold. You
don't pee out glucose unless you're a
diabetic. Glucose is stored in fat and
that's how we get. So, it's the sugar
that's making the fat, not the fat. And
the food industry puts on all low-fat
diet. What low fat means high carb. So,
you eat low fat, you're going to get
fat. So, you know, it's just the
marketing of how the industry works. And
don't tell me I I this stuff is
delicious. I mean, you eat a jelly fil
for me. I had jelly filled donut. Are
you kidding me? Especially with these
special shops. It's delicious, you know,
but I know if I eat too many of them,
I'm going to be in the in the ward. I'll
have to be demented, type two, diabetes,
cancer, some damn thing.
>> Well, and I think the the point that
you're making is that the rise in all of
these diseases are related to the same
cause. It's not like we think of them
all as different like cancer is
different from diabetes from
neurodeenerative disease but it's all
related to lifestyle and metabolic you
know disease. This is basically we're in
an epidemic of metabolic disease. But I
want to come back. So you said you know
low carb for 10 days. I'm wondering if
you can just explain what to you is low
carb like what is the grams that you
would say is considered low carbs?
>> Well again we try to do it based on the
glucose ketone index.
>> Okay. So as long as their GKI is less
than two, that's basically okay.
>> Yes. And everybody is not everybody, but
many people are different from each
other. So what might be easy for one
person may not be as easy for another
person. So if someone were a vegetarian,
they may have to choose foods that would
be a little different from the
carnivore, from the pescatarian, from
the Mediterranean. So everybody would
have to look at what they like. And they
always ask me, "Can I eat this? Can I
have no idea? Eat it and see what it
does to your GKI. If it makes it go up,
don't eat that."
>> No. Absolutely. And I think actually
this is an important factor because you
know recently I've done some work using
continuous glucose monitoring and seen
that gosh with different clients they
really respond so differently and our
bodies are all different and so and I
actually just got a meter from uh Keto
Mojo to test this to see because I
hadn't used um GKI before but okay so if
you do 10 days of low carb keeping the
GKI less And to
>> well don't forget now this is what we
what we have for the cancer patient. Um
okay so and sometimes we have to work
with them a little different than than
than the healthy young or the healthy
person. Okay. A healthy person might do
three or four days of low carb and
realize that. So you start off by
measuring your glucose ketone index and
you'll see how it changes during the
course of a day. So in the morning it
could be high. We call it the dawn
effect. And then during the course of
the day you can see it you know changing
and most of the time uh ketones are very
low in the bloodstream. I mean they're
there at a point.1.1 millmer or 2
millmer but as you stop eating and
exercise you begin to see the GKI go
down and and what that means is the
blood sugar is going down while the
ketones are going up and you divide the
glucose by the ketones in millolar and
then you can get a singular number and
it's the ratio of one fuel the glucose
to another fuel the ketone body in the
bloodstream of the person at that moment
in time they can match how how it goes
and and then all of a sudden you'll say,
"Man, this is tough, man. I can't get my
GKI down to 2.0. What do I have to do? I
said stop eat or or stay on the low
carb." So, anybody that would be uh a a
vegetarian or a vegan, they would have
to choose those foods that would be low
have low glycemic index, which means how
how fast uh sugar would be produced into
the blood from eating that. Okay. So,
they asked me, "What about fruits?" "Oh,
yeah, fruits." Well, I said, "Eat the
fruit and see what it does to your GKI.
If it makes it go up, don't eat that."
But when we worked with epilepsy kids,
my colleagues, my physician, uh knew
that grapefruit was a good way to get a
vitamin C and and it was a low glycemic
fruit. So, it provided the great vitamin
C and minerals, but it didn't have a
high glycemic index a as opposed to a
banana, you know, or something like
this. But everybody will have to
experiment in their own lifestyle going
through and it's kind of a game you as
you go through, you can start to see
your GKI going down over the days. Oh,
and you get all excited. Gez, it went
down by 10 points. Oh, look, it's going
down by another 10 points. Let me eat
this thing. Boom. Back up there. Now I
know I can't eat that. So and you're
right about the free Libra. Um I I
understand from my colleagues uh that
there might be a similar kind of
measurement for ketones as well. So you
might be able to get your GKI directly
uh real time. Uh but I think that
technology is on is on its way. The keto
mojo right now you have to prick your
finger and get a drop of blood and
measure with the glucose strip the
glucose and then with the ketone strip
the ketones the meter does the the
conversion and then you get the results.
But if they can do it with a free libra
then you really have uh you don't have
to be pricking your finger and in the
epilepsy field this was always a problem
for us. It was the little kids didn't
want their fingers pricricked to
determine what their what their glucose
and ketone levels were. So I think
that's coming down. It would be a great
technology and it allows the patient
then the individual to take charge of
their own destiny with respect to their
diets what they can eat what they can't
eat and they'll come to know now we
built glucose ketone index calculator
for cancer patients in particular
glyopblasto patients but since we built
that now we've learned the web all these
young athletic men and women they all
want to be buff and they want to be
looking tough and they all go on what's
your GKI I, you know, I'm looking like,
look at the muscle. Look at this. I have
no fat and all this. I didn't make it
for that. I didn't make it for those
people. I made it for the cancer folks.
But then we know the cancer folks have a
much more difficult time getting into
these low GKIs sometimes because of
emotional stress. What we found is that
uh and I think you know very much about
this, the fear of the diagnosis creates
a hormonal gluccocorticoids which is a
fear response raising blood sugar.
Consequently, the fear of the diagnosis
makes it a little harder to get into a
low GKI. So, one of the big parts of our
press pulse therapeutic strategy for man
managing cancer is stress management.
You have to bring the individual stress
down so that the metabolic uh homesis
begins to take take hold. So again,
stress management is an extremely
component for effective cancer
management because once you get that
glucose down, then we take drugs and
when you get into the low GKI levels,
cancer killing drugs become super
powerful um to kill at low doses. So
it's really amazing. You don't have to
have hair loss. You don't have to have
all of these horrific adverse effects to
kill cancer cells once you've taken away
their fermentable fuels or significantly
reduce them. And then we can slowly
degrade the tumor o over time and uh
like some of the folks that I know if
they had hypertension, high blood
pressure, diabetes, all that other stuff
goes away while you're degrading your
tumor. So you emerge as a kind of a new
evolved guy. You you don't have cancer,
you don't have diabetes. Now this is
this is not a good good news for the for
the pharmaceutical industries. In other
words, I can target all these things
simultaneously by using a glucose ketone
index. Well, and can you speak a little
bit to water fasting because you started
to talk about that, but so with someone
with cancer and I know you're also doing
the press pulse therapy with the
glutamine, but I'm just wondering can
you and I actually did have Lauren
Lochman on the show who does, you know,
prolonged water fasting Costa Rica, you
know, talk about that, but I'm wondering
if but the interesting thing is he
denied it was interesting because he was
telling me that the fasting was
detoxifying the cells and then also So
in improving immunity and that was the
mechanism and I said but you're missing
it's also basically putting them into
ketosis and it was interesting because
he kind of downplayed that part of it
but I'm wondering if you can speak a
little bit to water fasting and and what
type of fasting like how long are are
you
>> well when we did calorie restriction in
the mouse published a big paper on this
nutrition and metabolism where we were
characterizing the blood changes in a
mouse with a 40% restriction of its food
versus is a human water only fasting and
because the differences in basil
metabolic rate between a mouse and a
human you can't use uh you can't use
value in the mouse like what would be
equal to a human so 40% restriction in a
mouse is is comparable with lowering
blood sugar and elevating ketones and
reducing tri blood blood triglycerides
as well so we matched human and water
only fasting in human is like a 40%
calorie restriction in a mouse but don't
forget the mouse has a se a sevenfold
higher basil metabolic rate than human.
Don't forget their heartbeat. You know,
we're talking about uh what 70 60 to 70
beats per minute. Mouse says 600 600
beats a minute.
>> Wow.
>> So, so you have to do these conversions
like measured if you a head would blow
off the guy if he had a 600. So, they
the uh so we're trying to we're trying
to match the basil metabolic rates to to
to figure out what's going on. So, so
yes, water only fasting is comparable to
a 40% restriction in calories to a mouse
to produce the same uh physiological
changes in the blood. When when I and my
students uh and and associates first
started to realize how you kill cancer
cells by lowering blood sugar and
elevating ketones and targeting
glutamine, we didn't want to appear like
nuts, like some whack jobs. Oh yeah, you
want to get rid of your cancer, don't
eat for 21 days. You know what? What a
what a jackass. Who's going to who's
going to do that? You know, so I said,
"Well, why don't we try these like
ketogenic diets restricted and make it a
little bit less traumatic to tell this
poor poor cancer guy, oh come say how,
okay, doctor, instead of and we used to
say um you know, take one of these pills
a day with water and that's all you take
each day for three weeks." Well, they
without food. They always say take the
pill without with food, right? They
always said take this pill with a meal.
Oh, yo, take this pill once a day with
no meal for 21 days.
Well, they think you're nuts. Can I get
a second opinion on this? So, we said,
let's let's move the field slowly into
this realization that a change in
metabolic homeostasis can be done with
restricted diets and maybe some
modifications. But now I'm seeing more
and more folks are telling me, oh no,
you got a 21-way water only fasting. And
I've met so many people, cancer patients
who have eliminated their tumor like
ganon bomb uh doing this. And I didn't
tell them to do that. I I just and f
first of all I'm not a physician. I
can't tell anybody what to do or do what
not to do. I just have educational
material that they can look at make
their own decisions. But guy got rid of
all of his uh diabetes cancer and
everything. And I've seen more and more
people here's what happens. You ask the
question okay I wrote this paper called
autoolytic cannibalism. All right I have
it in my book. The body is a unique
machine. All the organs are working
together. uh the brain, the colons, the
I mean the the the the gut, the the the
uh um liver, kidneys, we all have this
machinery in our body all working all
all working together for the good of the
whole. And when there's enough energy
consumed, the cells of the body are all
sufficient in their energy. So there's
no lookout for anything that's not
efficient. There's no surveillance
because everybody all the cells seem to
be the brain every everything is sated
satiated. But then when you start
lowering the blood sugar by water only
fasting the body starts to look around.
Okay, you start mobilizing fats out of
your post tissue. And then as you
continue to do that, the normal cells of
the body, the brain cells and the liver
cells and the kidney cells all start
looking for the valuable fuel which is
glucose. And uh there's a threshold. So
now these cancer cells that are
absolutely dependent that were that were
not recognized by the normal body
because every everybody was fat and
happy. But when you start lowering this
level of energy, the body then will turn
on any group of cells is called
autophagy and the mitochondria and the
cells are then recognized as being not
efficient. Parts of the mitochondria are
go to the lo and are digested. only what
remains is the singular most efficient
metabolic system. And if you have cells
that are consuming excessive amounts of
a valuable fuel for everybody else, the
body will turn and eat those cells and
redistribute the energy to the rest of
the body called autoolytic
self-cannabizing
cells in your body that are not energy
efficient and those are cancer cells. So
then if you can stay in these zones of
low sugar, elevated ketones, the body
will eventually attack. And this is the
shot, the thing that we're seeing. Some
of these guys, they come out cancer.
What happened to my tumor? Where did it
go? The body ate it. And this you have
to know is evolutionary biology. So once
you understand evolutionary biology, all
this cancer stuff makes sense. The
problem is almost nobody knows anything
about evolutionary biology. So you're
doing all these crazy things that are
not consistent with how we all evolved
on the planet. So and that's what we go
back to the cancer cells. They're using
ancient fermentation pathways that
existed before oxygen came into the
atmosphere 2.5 billion years ago. So
they're just falling back on heirloom
pathways. All of our cells have those
same heirloom pathways, but they they're
only very minor in producing energy. But
but when the cancer cell can't get good
energy from oxidative phosphorilation,
they fall back and they those pathways
become the dominant form of energy. So
they're fermentation. They're just
nothing more than what we evolve that
this before this was we had a lot of
organisms on the planet before oxygen
came into the atmosphere. Don't forget
our earth evolved in a hypoxic
environment billions of years ago. There
was yet we have fossils of these cells
that lived and they were all fermenttors
and they would grow disregulated growth
until the fermentable fuel was used up
and they would die and we do the same
strategy to kill cancer. We just take
away their fermentable fuels while
enhancing the health and vitality of the
normal cells with ketone bodies. Cancers
can't use the ketones. It becomes a
restricted fuel only for normal cells,
not the tumor cell. It's beautiful. It's
unbelievable when you start to see the
power of what your body can do when
given the opportunity to heal itself.
It's amazing and and I love talking to
you because you know the science so
deeply which is fascinating to listen. I
have a question for you. Is the idea of
cancer cells growing more rapidly? And
if the the DNA changes are really just
effects of this malfunctioning
mitochondria,
why does it appear that they're growing
faster? And actually, so Dr. Tom Cow and
I read his book water and the new
biology or cancer and the new biology of
water and he talks in there about that
like maybe that the cancer cells aren't
growing faster and I'm just and also he
says that the DNA damage is an effect
and I'm just wondering if you can speak
to that idea of why would the cancer
cells be growing faster if they're
dysfunctional and using fermentation for
their metabolism?
>> No, they're they they use fermentation
for their metabolism.
>> Yeah, they do. But
>> why do they grow faster? Okay. Brace
yourself. Brace yourself. You want the
Do you want the answer to this question?
>> I I want the answer. Yes.
>> Okay. Okay. The organel that maintains
the differentiated state is the
mitochondria. Okay. The mitochondria
controls the differentiated quiescent
state of the cell. The cell is alive in
a whether it's a liver cell, a lung
cell, colon, whatever it is. And it's
doing its programmed activities. They
call them house housekeeping. whatever
it is or all that energy is efficiently
distributed from the mitochondria
through oxidative phosphorilation. when
that organel also if the cell has to uh
repair or in the gut you have this these
constant cl um cells that come in
there there's a regulated riment of
cells there's growth but it's a
regulated growth not a disregulated
growth it's the mitochondrian that
maintains the regula the quscent state
and the and the growth of the cell uh
when that organ organel becomes
corrupted losing its ability to produce
lose energy through oxidative
phosphorilation, the cell begins to grow
out of control because the regulatory
system itself loses the control. And
this is all this is very very intriguing
because we could we know about the thing
called the cell cycle, the mitosis, the
DNA synthesis, the resting and all this.
This is all controlled by cyclones, uh
checkpoints and all this kind of stuff
that's all regulated by the calcium
gradients from the mitochondria. So if
the mitochondria calcium gradients start
to fall because they're no longer
getting energy from respiration, the the
the controlling mechanism of cell
division and control of growth goes out
the window.
>> Are you passionate about the
groundbreaking and heroic research of
Dr. Thomas Cipher on metabolic therapy
and cancer? So are we. That's why we've
created something special for you in
collaboration with Johnny Rockermeer, a
German book publisher and translator.
Introducing our collection of
meticulously crafted books that distill
the essence of Dr. Safe Reed's work.
Dive into the science and discoveries.
These summary books are your gateway to
understanding the intricate world of
metabolic ketogenic therapy in a clear,
concise, and engaging way. Whether
you're new to the subject or a seasoned
enthusiast, our books offer insights
that can change your life. Ready to
explore this transformative knowledge?
Visit our website at www.cancer as a
metabolic disease.com to get your copy.
You can buy the ebook there directly and
the paperbook via the provided links.
Here's the best part. A portion of every
purchase goes directly to support Dr.
Thomas Safereaded's groundbreaking
research. That's why the direct ebook
purchase is the best option to donate as
much as possible. You can see all of the
donations Mr. Rocker has already made at
www. ketoforcancer.net.
That's right. When you buy our books,
you're not just investing in your own
knowledge, you're also contributing to
the future of cancer research. Help us
make a difference. Together, we can
drive change and save lives. So the cell
gradually loses its the the controller
of the destiny of the cell is now taken
off. You know, people always say cancer
cells are um they have a growth
advantage. Such an incredibly stupid
question statement. It's not that they
have a growth advantage. They're
disregulated because the regulator is
broken. You want to see what regulation
growth looks like? Liver regeneration.
You know that a lobe taken off of
someone's liver, the liver will
regenerate that lobe. And those
regenerating liver cells grow faster
than any tumor, than any hepatoma, liver
tumor. So why they know exactly when to
stop. They don't continue to grow out of
control. It's under control growth. And
that's because the mitochondria are
directing that.
>> That is amazing because that like that
has always not made sense to me. Like if
they're dysfunctional, then why do we
talk about them being, you know, growing
more aggressively and faster? It's like
having a car that works better when it's
broken than, you know, when it's fully
functional. So that makes sense to me.
>> Oh, everything people have not people
have been nuclearentric in biology for
centuries because they could see the
nucleus under the microscope. It was
very hard to see the mitochondria. This
is kind of amorphous stuff. But now
we're realizing that it's the
mitochondria that are the controllers
not only of the cell cycle, not only of
the functionality of the cell, but also
aging. We when we die natur by natural
causes, our bodies just simply shut down
energetically. That's because the
mitochondria have reached their end
point. And uh none of us are going to
live to be 200 years old, but we can
certainly allow us to live a little bit
longer if we keep our mitochondria
healthy. And this is the mitochondrial
theory of aging that reactive oxygen
species by just breathing air for for
decades causes wear and tear on your
mitochondria and eventually sustain. You
cannot avoid equilibrium. And I always
said equilibrium is death. When when the
mitochondria can no longer produce
energy, the ionic currents across the
membrane reach equilibrium and you're
dead. That's it. We have no longer any
energy. And energy is life. Without
energy, we we don't live. Cancer cells
are immortal uh as long as they have
fermentable fuels in the micro
environment. And this was exactly what
happened before oxygen came in 2.5
billion years ago. They were
disregulated in their growth. They have
no regulation because the mitochondria
had not yet merged to be the symbiosis
between cyanobacteria and these and
these other bacteria that came together
to form this hybrid thing which was the
beginning of metazoneans where we get a
multisellular division of labor within
everything. Before that it was just
growth out of control. no mitochondria,
no so a cancer is just falling back on
this ancient pathway. They're not have a
growth advantage. They have no growth
control and it looks like they're
growing out of control. There's no no
control here. And once you know that
it's driven by fermentation, glucose and
glutamine and they can't burn fatty
acids or ketones. This is the path. It's
very clear how to manage cancer.
>> Yeah. Well, and I love too that you
brought in the whole role of stress
because that's one of the things with
GMs is monitoring patients glucose.
They'll say, "I ate the same thing as I
ate yesterday. Why is my glucose
higher?" And it's related. You know,
what happened? What just happened that
day before you had that measurement? And
I love this that you're bringing
attention to it that stress, you know, I
I I put it together for like weight loss
when we're trying to help patients lose
weight. understand that stress plays a
role in that. But I love how you
connected the diagnosis and the fear
related to that not only is releasing
stress hormones which ultimately affects
our ability to heal, but it's also
raising the sugar which is further
complicating the problem. And the other
thing too seen from many published
papers, people who get radiation,
regardless of where it is, if it's any
part of the body, it creates a stress
and blood sugar goes through the roof
after you irdiate somebody. And chemo
and all the a lot of the things that we
do to people uh raises all this blood
sugar. Uh all these things can make the
cancer uh it's hard to kill a tumor cell
when it has a load of its fermentable
fuels in the micro environment. So when
we in our press pulse concept we use
spirituality, prayer, uh massage
therapy, aquapon, anything that lowers
the stress that a person feels
comfortable doing while knowing that if
you have a low GKI and you take small
doses of the drugs that target glutamine
and glucose, you can degrade slowly your
tumor while maintaining a very high
level of overall health. It doesn't have
to be all this toxic treatment. uh it
doesn't have to be all this that speaks
to a fundamental lack of knowledge an
understanding the biology and
biochemistry of the disorder you're
trying to treat. So we put all that
together over years and I have to be
honest without an understanding of
evolutionary biology none of this stuff
would be known. I have to know that
because I read this stuff. I look at
this stuff. I test it in my lab. And
then of course metastatic cancer is
interesting because we have shown that
the metastatic cancer cell regardless of
whether it's a breast, a colon, a lung,
they're macrofage. They characterize
macrof. Macrofage is an immune cell in
our body. It's called it's like it's
like the Marine Corps. It's your either
your best friend or your worst enemy.
It's it's designed to attack and kill
bacteria in our body. Okay? If you get a
stab wound or a broken bone or anything
like that and the skin is breached, uh,
bacteria get in and then we have
monocytes pouring out of the bloodstream
maturing into macrofasages to kill the
invading bacteria because if we don't
beat that down real quick, we're going
to be dead from from an infection,
sepsis or something like this. So those
cells are macrofages and they're heavily
glutamine dependent. Now when you have
an incipient cancer like a a wound that
doesn't heal and it's there for long
periods of time could be decades uh the
macrofasages are always in there trying
to facilitate wound healing. And what
happens sometimes they release growth
factors and cytoines that are supposed
to facilitate wound healing but in that
context it actually stimulates these
disregulated cells to grow a little a
little faster. So the mac and then
they're getting bigger causing a bigger
disturbance in in the micro environment
and macrofasages have this unique
biological capability. They're
fusogenic. They will fuse with each
other and sometimes fuse with these
cancer cells. The cancer cell at that
point the disregulated cell has no
capacity to spread anywhere other than
that in that focal area. So what happens
is it fuses with the very cell trying to
heal the wound and then the the
cytoplasm of this macrofage becomes
diluted with the abnormal mitochondria
from the cancer cell and now you have
this dysfunctional macroofage a rogue
what already is programmed to enter and
exit tissues and spread around your
body. So when I found out that all these
metastatic cues are essentially fusion
hybrid between one of our immune cells,
I went back to the news in Oxford,
England and I they studied these
macrofagages for years and I said I said
what do they eat? And they they eat
glutamine. When a person is is burned
and you open the skin up to all kinds of
bacteria, they give highdosese glutamine
to these burn patients in order to keep
our immune system healthy to kill the
invading bacteria. So, so I know the
cancer cells are sucking down the
glutamine because they need they need it
to ferment. So, now they're fermenting
this glutamine. So, we know exactly how
to kill metastatic cancer cells. We know
how to kill all these cancer cells if
you understand the biology and
biochemistry of the system in the
context of evolutionary biology.
>> And so, is that only important in the
setting of metastatic disease? The
glutamine inhibitors or depriving of
glutamine?
>> Yeah, because I think most people fear
when you when anybody says they have a
stage four, that's metastasis. Okay. So
that was considered terminal. Uh we
don't consider that term in terminal
anymore. We consider that susceptible to
metabolic therapy. So glucose glutamine
targeting. Now I don't want to make it
sound like we have a panacea here. All I
want to say is that we are on the
cutting edge of dosage, timing, and
scheduling for using the body's healing
capabilities together with strategically
placed drugs. Because if we become too
aggressive on the glutamine, we
imparalize the normal macrofasages and
immune cells in our